[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Omega's a place for people
to deal with the experience
of life--
>> --come home to themselves--
>> --seekers of all kinds--
>> --a spiritual community--
>> --our paths.
>> --house with many rooms--
>> --it's a ticket
into spirituality--
>> --spirit of
holistic education--
>> --kindred spirits--
>> --clear sense of what
it would be like really be
themselves.
>> Retreats have
always been important.
>> --learning and fun.
>> Omega is a great gift.
>> You're always
going to the desert.
>> There's hundreds of
thousands of seekers.
>> --a pool for unity.
>> You always retreat.
>> --refuge in the 21st century.
[ASIAN MUSIC]
>> Guess I was about 33.
And I was really one of
these really frenetic--
I got to get this done.
I got to-- everything.
I was running around
trying to get--
I was doing comedy.
I was getting acting jobs.
I was running, trying
to get a catering job.
I was just trying to make
money, running around,
trying to make connections.
I didn't really like anybody,
but I just needed to--
we needed to be friendly
[LAUGHS] at home.
[DRUMMING]
So I had this girlfriend
at the time where I really
was living with her for,
like, about five years.
And she kind of had
suffered with me
through this whole thing.
She was getting into a lot
of Deepak Chopra and yoga
and things like that.
She wanted to go
live in community.
She wanted to experience nature.
She was really getting into
the whole spiritual aspect
of things.
And she didn't like New York.
She wanted to get
out of New York.
She was sick of New York.
She had finished with New York.
And I had, too, but
I needed to create.
And I had to get that
carrot, the carrot.
I was after the carrot.
So finally, she
decided, that's it.
She decided she was going
out to this artist commune
in this New Mexico desert.
And she said, I'm going.
And I was, like, I couldn't.
But I was, like, why would
anybody go to New Mexico?
Is that even like a
part of this country?
I was just completely
baffled why
anybody would want to go there
and especially, you know,
in the desert.
So she went to New Mexico.
I couldn't believe it, totally
shocked the hell out of me.
Went out to this place
and left me there.
And I was just
completely flabbergasted.
I didn't know what to do.
I didn't know how I would get
out there, why I would even
leave New York.
My family was there.
How could I ever leave?
How could I quit my stuff?
How could I change
my life and do that?
It would be impossible.
And I finally decided
OK, I'm doing this.
I sold everything.
I just quit everything.
I got rid if the apartment.
I just left New York.
And I went out to this--
I took this plane.
Probably, I think, I'd been
on a plane once in my life
and went out to New Mexico,
completely sick to my stomach,
and had to take this little,
like, two-men crop duster
thing.
It was pretty ridiculous.
And then we went out to
this desert in New Mexico.
She was waiting for me there.
And I get there.
And I'm so happy to see her
because I hadn't seen her
for six months.
But I knew when I got
there, something was up,
that something
just wasn't right,
because she wanted me to
come, but something just
wasn't right.
So two days later,
she burst into tears
and said she had met somebody.
Well, and I was, like,
it was only three weeks
since I had talked to her and
said I was going down there.
She had met someone.
I was, like, what?
She goes, yeah I'm
in love with him.
I'm sorry, I should
have told you.
And this big Native
American guy came I came up
and he started putting all
her stuff in the truck,
and they basically took off
and left me in this community.
And I was, like, oh, no.
What am I--
I was in complete shock.
I didn't know what to do.
So I kind of just
started walking,
because I was in complete shock.
And I walked along
through this desert
for literally the whole night.
And I wound up at this
kind of motel next
to this liquor store.
And I was so distraught and so
embarrassed and so completely--
I had gotten rid of all my--
you know, gotten rid of all
my connections in New York
and just said, I'm
not coming back.
That's it.
I'm gone.
I was too embarrassed
to even admit
that I'd just got out
there for a couple days,
and I didn't know what to do.
And I just went to
the tailspin and just,
like, drank, like, Cuervo
Tequila and listened
to Perry Como tapes for the
next two months which was, like,
(SINGING) and I love you so
just over and over again.
Completely went crazy one day.
And I started running through
the forest completely naked,
started running
through the forest.
I ran into this river.
I was just walking
through this river.
And the current
completely took me away.
And it was, like,
[MAKES DROWNING NOISE],,
and I completely
wound up getting lost
and not knowing where I was,
and the night had passed.
I couldn't see anything.
It was pitch dark.
And I actually slammed
this rock, bam,
and it knocked me out.
And I woke up.
I woke up in the morning, and
I completely just wanted to--
I didn't know if I wanted to
die or whatever, just, like,
I didn't want to be there.
I woke up in the morning, and
there was literally this elk
standing over me.
And I was, like, ah!
And I completely didn't--
it was these brown eyes,
and I completely looked at it.
It was apparently just
standing there watching
over me or some bizarre
thing which I couldn't really
even begin to conceive of.
And so when I woke up, when
I saw that, for some reason,
it completely took
my breath away,
it completely changed
my perception.
I actually kind of was looking
at it, and it nodded at me,
and it walked down.
I was like, holy shit,
did this just happened?
And I went up on this--
I stepped-- I pulled
myself onto this ledge.
And it was-- hours had passed.
And I felt like I could
breathe for the first time.
And I actually was
watching the sunset.
And for the first
time in my life,
I could actually notice
that how blue the sky was
and how the sun was
playing off these cliffs.
It was changing
color constantly.
It was amber,
orange, red, purple,
and it was just
constantly changing.
It was completely
amazing the way
these shadows were
playing off the cliff.
And how blue and how
alive the sky was.
Like, in New York, you
never even see stars.
It was just forever, this thing.
And I immediately-- I
just wanted to grab,
wanted to keep this
whole thing, wanted
to keep this whole scene
because I wanted to be there,
because it was first
time I'd actually
realized that there was
something besides me.
And I was like, whoa.
I didn't want to let it go.
I wanted just to
have, like, a picture.
So eventually the moon came up.
I realized it just--
everything had changed.
And I realized that
you can't actually
hold on to these things.
That was the first
time I actually
had that validation
of that feeling
that it's all kind of
changing and it's all--
it just comes and goes.
And you can't hold on, and you
can't grasp, and you can't--
whatever happens
just kind of happens.
You have to kind of let it go.
And that was basically it.
I got that realization and went
back to New York after a while.
It allowed me to
actually understand
things in an experiential
level that had an effect on me
as far as the way I
lived my life after that.
I wasn't perfect.
I wasn't like a saint
or anything like that,
but I definitely understood
more about letting
go and about things
being other, not New York
being not the only thing.
And the reality that
we have in New York
wasn't the only reality.
Into that mind frame of running
and running and running.
And I got to get here.
I got to get there.
I got to go.
And I think I can do it
without becoming completely
overrun by it is the
word, I guess it would.
I can be it, and I can
almost be with it--
almost be with it rather
than have it rule over me,
basically, rather than have it
dictate my constant running.
So I think in that respect, that
pretty much changed everything
in the way I relate in New York.
And in general to
people, I think
I had a deeper
relationship with people.
My relationships
became much deeper,
I think, more than anything.
[GUITAR MUSIC]
[THEME MUSIC]
>> I'm best known as the author
of "The Art of Sexual Ecstasy,"
"The Art of Sexual Magic," and
"The Art of Everyday Ecstasy."
I have published in 18
countries and, you know,
many, many books.
And people know me as a
teacher of ecstatic sexuality.
And I brought to the
West the teachings
of Tantra, which is the art
of living a blissful life.
So having taught so many
people, people often
imagine that I have
a flawless love
life and a perfect marriage
and perfect relationships.
And well, I recently had,
like every other woman
in the world, at
least 50% of them,
the experience of
divorcing my husband.
I'm the one that declared
that it was time to divorce,
and we loved each other
a lot, but we're just
not made or meant to
really fit with each other.
And so after many
upheavals having
to do with different
perspectives
on sacred sexuality
mainly, and I
would say different
perspectives on integrity
around sexuality, not to
go deeper into the subject,
I declared that I
wanted to divorce.
And we were literally
half a day away
from going to the Himalayas
with a group of friends,
and we had planned that tour.
They were all there--
united couples.
And here we were,
about to separate,
going on a journey
of one month to do
a pilgrimage in the Himalayas.
Hilarious, right?
So we decided to
make the best of it,
and we had a tantric divorce.
And we had an ecstatic divorce
if that would ever be possible.
Now granted, for us,
it was fairly easy
because we didn't have children.
We had been together
six years, and it
was time for a separation.
So what was so incredible is
that we could have one month
together to do it, and
that we used everything
that we went through as
a way to fully live out
the grief, the anger, the
reproaches, the difficulties
of our separation.
So I picked the most incredible
places like on top of a glacier
with a view over the valleys.
And I called him
forth, and I said,
let's have a ritual of cutting
the energy cords between us
so that we could
create, energetically,
a separation while we have
this incredible view around.
Or let's sit by the
waterfall and imagine
that the water is washing
through our spirits
and taking away all the
difficulties that we
have gone through.
And so we sat by the
waterfalls holding hands.
Another time, I created,
literally out of the blue,
an incredible quarrel
because I knew we
had a lot of anger to let out.
So I told whatever
story I told so that we
could get mad at each other.
And so we were totally mad
at each other, screaming.
And it was an
incredible catharsis.
We needed to go
through a catharsis,
following which, he booked
a room in the best hotel
in Dharamsala.
And we had a night of love
that I will never forget.
You see?
So we went through all the
difficulties and all the pain
but somehow, it was such
a graceful way of ending.
And then we went
our separate ways.
He went to Nepal.
I went back to America.
Then the trouble started.
I actually realized that
I never really wanted
to look into the
deeper layers of grief.
And so I was in Holland
working on my next book,
and suddenly, my
body fell apart.
I felt I was becoming old and I
was bloated and I was half sick
and I had no energy.
That's not me.
I'm hardly ever like this.
And I didn't quite understand
what was happening.
So I looked inside
deeper and deeper,
and I realized that there
was a layer of grief
about the separation that I had
never allowed myself to feel.
And I decided to start
with yoga and with diet
and with exercising and with
really taking care of my body.
And I went into
complete brahmacharya
or sexual abstinence for five
months just being by myself
and really taking care of
myself and looking inside
and meditating and going more
into releasing my ex beloved.
And when that was finished, I
came back home only to hear,
as I was feeling better,
that he was coming back
to live in this
area for four months
in the same area in California.
And no sooner was I feeling
just about stabilized,
that I get an email and a call.
Can he see me?
And there he was.
Ha, I tell you, it was really
something to see him again.
But that was a turning point.
And as I looked at him in his
eyes, I had to tell him this.
I said, you know,
this is the first time
that I can tell you
that I'm grateful to you
for all the troubles that I went
through in our relationship.
Because I experienced so much
grief, so much anger, so much
anxiety about whatever I thought
you were putting me through,
and now I own it.
That was the way I responded.
I could have
responded differently.
But still, I went
so deeply into that,
that now I feel
like I'm vaccinated.
Nobody could ever-- who would do
the same things or would behave
in the same way--
nobody could ever
touch me again.
I would be free of it.
If these things happened again,
I could breeze through them
without any trouble at all.
And so in a way, I
have gained in freedom
and I have gained in wisdom.
And even those troubles
that I went through
were like a gift of
wisdom for which I'm
grateful because I feel
so much more free with men
now, so much less
attached and needy
and a need to control and
be sure that everything's
going to go right.
And so in a way, that
is a strange thing.
But I believe that
sometimes, the moments that
bring us the deepest pain,
the deepest difficulty,
are also the moments that
bring us the deepest wisdom
and that put us so in
touch with ourselves
that if we live them fully,
we are free of them forever.
Existence doesn't
need to bring us back
the same thing, the
same situations,
because we are done with it.
And so that's my story.
So those of you out there who
are in a difficult relationship
or who are declaring that
it's time to divorce,
remember my story, and maybe
you will feel inspired by it.
Remember, it's even
possible to have a tantric
or an ecstatic divorce.
>> I'm a gay male.
And in my relationships in the
past, what has happened to me,
and what I have found that
has occurred all the time,
is a repetitiveness.
Relationships, for
whatever reasons,
they were always ended abruptly.
And when they did, there was no
closure on their relationship,
and I never got to say the
things that I would necessarily
wanted to say with that
person in order to move on
to the next relationship.
And what happened from that is
that I carried that baggage, so
to speak, with me from
relationship to relationship.
There's been a lot of sadness
that's come up for me.
It's interesting because
my expectations--
it's not that they
weren't met but what's
happening is not those things.
Last year, last
summer I met someone.
And I planned a picnic
with him, and I remember
my stomach was in knots.
We had been dating
about a month.
And I really felt
strongly about this guy,
and I had not felt that
way in a long time.
And we had been dating, as
I said, for about a month,
and I made a picnic lunch.
And there was
something going on.
There was attention.
There was whatever
you want to call it,
something there that
wasn't real for how we
had been over the last month.
And I asked him about it.
And he said to me that he didn't
feel the same things for me
as I had felt for him in
the area of going forward
with a physical and
sexual relationship
but that he loved me, and
he cared a lot about me.
I don't think he actually
used the word love,
but he cared a lot about me,
and I meant a great deal to him.
My history came up right then.
And I got this look
at the fact of,
OK, here is that feeling of
rejection one more time, Ira,
and let's see what that
looks like right now.
And I listen to my friends--
I heeded my friend
Irene's words,
and she said look at the
bigger picture, and I did.
So I remember calling
him a day or two later.
And I got to say to him all
the things that I have ever
wanted to say to anybody in
the ending of a relationship.
And it brought great
closure to my past.
And it has changed
forever the way
I look at relationships
and the way I hold them.
And this man is somebody who is
in my life, always in my heart.
Spiritually, we will
always be connected.
I will always love him as
he will always love me.
>> What are you
afraid of right now?
>> The first thing that came up
for me was being alone forever.
>> Can you talk about
that a little more?
>> It gets very
depressing for me.
It's futile being
where I live now.
When I lived in the city, it
was really easy to meet people.
>> Take a breath again.
Let the breath straighten you.
Up just a a little bit.
Don't push too hard.
>> There was a lot of
pain for me that I shared,
a lot of pain that I
never realized was there.
And I cried a lot last summer.
And, like, my stomach where I
used to store all that stuff
was, like, uh, you don't want
to know how horrible that was.
And so, I mean, it's
not anything, per se,
that I said to him
that cleared it.
It was the act of saying it.
It was all of this stuff
that that signified.
It's interesting, Joe,
this is the first time
that I can remember my
stomach holding a strength.
>> Your stomach, what?
>> Holding a strength,
holding a validity,
a validation of something rather
than a fear of something like
dismissal.
>> I see.
You more often feel
fear in your stomach.
>> Oh, yeah, it churns.
That's where it always shows up.
What I learned is
that there's more
to a relationship with a man
than getting him into the sack.
That you can have a
really tender and loving
relationship with somebody
and not have it be about--
excuse me, with a man-- and
not have it be about sex.
And I had not ever experienced
that like that with a gay man
before.
>> Just let yourself feel
what's going on in there.
[LONG EXHALE]
[INHALES]
[EXHALES]
>> I have come a long
way in the last year,
year and a half or so when this
whole spiritual journey opened
up for me.
And I've understood
and understand more so
the difference between
loneliness and being alone.
I don't feel lonely a lot.
I feel alone a lot.
And alone means
not having somebody
in my life who is a
partner, who is somebody
who I can share that
space with that I
call my house and my bed and my
shower and, like, anything else
that goes with that.
Sure I've had gay
friends, but never ones
that I was so attracted to
that I wanted to sleep with.
And here was a man
that I was attracted
to that didn't fit
all my pictures,
but there was
something about him
that just pushed every
sexual energy button I had.
And I wasn't going to
sleep with him anymore.
And I could still love him, and
I could still be loved by him.
And our relationship
could be tender and gentle
and sweet and spiritual
and communicative
and all of those things.
And that's very
refreshing for me.
Thank you, sir.
I mean it seems like, OK.
[BOTH CHUCKLE]
[FLUTE MUSIC]
[THEME MUSIC]